War was a war of small groups, basically, out by
themselves. There'd be a patrol, maybe an army
patrol of
anywhere from six to twelve people would go out.
And they'd be out, you know, maybe four or five
miles from anybody else. And a lot of times a guy got
hit, he got left, you know, because there just
wasn't any way to get him back. The other guys were,
you know, they were under attack and having to
fight their way out. And if somebody got hit and he
dropped, they most of the time couldn't even get to
him, you know, to see what was going on. So it was
assumed he was dead and he was left. Some of the
fighting was in the camps, particularly among the
ranger camps that had come in at night.
But they were pretty well bunkered, and it was just
kind of a...
It wasn't a whole lot of shooting going on in the
daytime in a lot of areas in Vietnam. It was a
nighttime operation. Do you have a lot of
hypochondriacs looking for a medical way out of
war? Didn't have a lot, but we had some. Some? We
didn't call them hypochondriacs. They were
malingering. Malingering? That's a conscious
effort to try and get out of something, as opposed
to somebody who may have some psychosomatic
symptoms. We had both kinds. We had some
psychosomatic symptoms of people who just
subconsciously said, you know, I've got to get out
of here, so they got sick. And, you know, all the
physical
signs, everything else. They were, that was a
psychosomatic symptom that they were having. uh
but we had some who would come in think we've had
some shoot themselves
but they're very much of a minority
we even had them come in and deliberately fail
their golden clothes you know their urine check
for drugs guys that probably never took a drug in
their life would take some and then run quickly
because those guys got sent home, even though they
may wind up with a dishonorable or a general
discharge. It was worth it to them to get out of
Vietnam.
How did the American military medical system
compare to that of South Vietnam? Well, South
Vietnam was grossly inferior. Their system And
much of their equipment and so forth was American.
They didn't have very many doctors. The doctors
that they had, some of them were very good. Some of
them were not well-trained at all. Their
hospitals, they had a 1,000-bed
hospital in downtown Da Nang. They were sleeping
sometimes three to a bed.
Americans didn't take near the number of
casualties that the Vietnamese had.
And they couldn't be shipped off somewhere. They
had to stay in country, and they got up just as soon
as they could, and they sent them back to
the war. When I was talking to Dr. Walker, he
mentioned the MedCap system, but he didn't. Can
you tell me a little bit about that? Yeah.
Basically, there was a two-tiered structure
there. Besides the military medicine business,
they also had what they called a cord, which is a
state department, a function of the state
department, not of the department of military.
These people were there to advise and to set up
public health programs, industrial medicine
programs, set up little clinics and things in the
various small communities. In addition, they
would frequently ask us to provide manpower to go
out to little villages and stuff that hadn't seen a
doctor for years and go out there and examine and
treat what we could. So once a week, we would take,
we'd go out to some of the little refugee areas
around Da Nang and have a clinic. And we saw
everything from scrofula, TB, to
schistosomiasis, you know, every disease you can
imagine over there, typhoid.
many, many things, and we would just take a long
supply of drugs and give them enough that we
thought would treat that, that would treat a lot of
injuries, wounds, infections, and this sort of
thing.
But we had that, and we had a dentist would go along,
and he would pull teeth and try and improve the
dental care, which generally was very poor. But
this was something that was ongoing at every
military medical facility. We always spent some
time doing that sort of thing.
Do you think of any problems, looking back, with
the medical system in Vietnam?
Oh, gosh.
Do you think it should change? The biggest
problem? was not so much with the system, although
the system is like any system. It's got its
bureaucracies, and sometimes it is just
hell-getting things that you need. You've got to
be able to learn to work with the system and plan
ahead and keep yourself stockpiled. And
sometimes you'd run out of stuff and you'd have to
make a whole bunch of phone calls, you know. It was a
major pain in the ass sometimes to get some things,
which you could almost always get. I can't think of
any time we really suffered when we were out of
something. The system was
bureaucratically overloaded. There were a lot
more administrators sometimes, I think, than
there were people out doing the job. That was one
thing that's true of every big business. You can go
down to Hillcrest and see the same thing. We've got
too many people administrating, not enough
people doing the work.
Bureaucracy is one problem, but it wasn't a major,
and it was a nuisance, but it wasn't a major
problem. The biggest real problem we had over
there was the lack of support from him. You know,
the average GI heard he got letters from his
girlfriend or from his wife or from his mother and
father, and he read the newspapers and he saw the TV
and things like that, and he got pretty
discouraged. You know, here he's over there
getting his butt shot at, and people burning the
flag in Washington, D.C., and that sort of thing.
There just wasn't any support, and so it's kind of
a, you know, so what type attitude was kind of easy
to prevail. And, you know, seeing your friends,
guys that you were buddying up with getting killed
and and so forth while all this was going on was
really a very disheartening process. And I think
that's one of the things that everybody who went to
Vietnam carries with them a little bit, is a real
resentment
at being shoved off there to do and die without
family or anything for a year or two years or
however long it happened
to be. people bad-mouthing Jane Fonda. They
burned Jane Fonda in effigy at the officer's club
one night when she was visiting in North Vietnam.
And our esteemed fourth estate, we had a lot of
reporters and stuff around there, and most of the
time they were in the bar getting drunk, and they'd
sit down and type out some story that was so far
removed from the truth. We had good ones, too. I'm
not saying they were all like that. We had some real
losers over there. They greatly destroyed my
respect for the news media.
I know that a lot of the vets were ill received when
they came back home. How was that for you?
I think there are a couple of little incidents that
happened to, you know, people being kind of rude.
Nothing major that I can think
of. No problem finding a job or anything? No. I went
back. Of course, I was still on active duty and went
back to that. a cushy job. The biggest problem I had
was going from something where things were life
and death and you got things done to a real Mickey
Mouse bureaucratic, super bureaucratic
oriented society. It took me a couple of years
again not to get pissed off every time somebody
asked me to fill out something in triplicate.
I'm
going to wrap this up.
Find out statements from people who implemented
the war, administrators, and people back here get
their opinions on why we were there and what went on
and all. From you, a doctor's point of view, why was
America in Vietnam?
Well, i don't know that i can give you one as a
doctor's point of view because it's impossible to
have a doctor's point of view on that i met a lot of
people over there and several missionary type
fellas and women i remember i met one a lady who ran
an orphanage that we kind of took care of and She and
her husband had been in Vietnam for 20 years and
been taken care of. They had this orphanage and
they took care of the kids and it was up north, up
toward Hue. And one night the Viet Cong, the North
Vietnamese came in, took her out, beat her up,
raped her, shot her husband, and took all the male
children off. And some of the older female
children were raped.
And then they just kind of left.
I met a Catholic
priest who was born in Canada, a French parentage,
and then moved to Hanoi. when he was fairly young,
was raised in Hanoi, which at that time was French.
And was raised there, went to seminary back in
Canada, I guess, and then came back to Hanoi where
he practiced. And he, of course, when the French
were fighting after the war with the French, he
divided the country. He and, uh, several other
people who were in French Distraction came south.
Well, uh, he was telling us about how the, uh, Viet
Cong recruited. He said they'd take one man and go
into a village, and some of these villages were
only, you know, 10, 12 families. They'd go in there
and they'd call, and they'd have guns. Nobody else
had guns. They'd call out, and they'd take the head
man and shoot him. And they'd say, I want every one
of you to follow me. He says, if you don't, we're
going to kill everybody in the village. So all the
males would go out, and they'd take these eight
guys, and they'd go into a bigger village and do the
same thing. Until from that one communist, he had
recruited about 150, 200 people, all of which were
then politically indoctrinated and so forth, but
basically held they would have done in the threats
of killing their family. And this is how it all
started.
Now, later on, you have to go back in the Vietnamese
history. The Vietnamese had been subjugated by
just about everybody who moved. In that whole part
of the world, the Chinese were first. And there's
still a great deal of enmity between the Chinese,
although there were a lot of Chinese,
particularly in South Vietnam. There were a lot of
Chinese ancestry people there. But the
Vietnamese have no fondness for the Chinese at
all, as you can see by recent events. the
Vietnamese were basically fighting a war for
independence. They wanted to be Vietnamese, they
wanted their own country, and they wanted, that
was it. So later, when the, after the Communists
became a little stronger, they were able to parlay
this
nationalistic point of view. into some recruits
who really believed that, you know, things had
been really lousy under the French. Things had
been really lousy before that, and before that,
and before that. Why not give these other guys a
chance? And they taught good, and in fact they had
done some good.
The life of the Vietnamese right now is somewhat
better than it has ever been before, although
they've still got a long way to go. They're still a
very poor country. A lot of good natural
resources, you know, hardwood forests and a lot of
fishing and stuff, but they just don't have the
capital to exploit it.
So a lot of people could see this, you know, but
nevertheless, it was my contention that anything
that starts out as this started out has got to be
inherently evil. And that is my reason why I feel
that if there was a reason for being there, that
must be it. Now, that's not to say that I think we
should have been there. Because I think had we not
blindly aided the French and had helped Ho Chi Minh
at the time when he asked for help, that we could
have reverted this whole business and had, true, a
communist society, as Yugoslavia was communist,
as Romania and several other countries in which we
had fairly good relations were communist, but we
could have had a lot more stability in that area and
maybe prevented some of the Cambodian and other
real problems that we have now, or they have no
longer in the country. Uh, why do you think we lost?
Because we weren't committed to win.
That's all the questions I have prepared. Is there
anything that you can think of that might be
helpful in my research or that you'd like to add?
No, I don't know. We've got a lot of good
information from him. Bear in mind, I haven't
thought about Vietnam for a long time, so
I can't think of too much else. It's really
interesting. I'll just tell you some anecdotal
things now. They're probably not going to be of any
great interest. I was dual-rated. I was a
physician, and I was also a pilot. So I flew F-4
combat missions while I was over there, too. And
mostly at night, because I worked, you know, had my
hands full during the day. You know, you're either
busy or bored, and, you know, I'll tell you.
Sitting in a two-by-whoops drink and scratching
my idea, not the way to pass the time. It's not my
thing, so I kept kind of busy. But anyway, I'd get
up, breathe permission, get through working
about 7 or 8 o'clock, go home, sleep for a couple
hours, breathe permission at 1 o'clock, and fly
until about 7 or 8 in the morning. And I had some very
interesting experiences. at Da Nang, you could
not land from the south coming north, because you
passed over what was called Arizona territory.
And this was territory that was mostly rice fields
and stuff that was controlled by the Viet Cong. And
this is where rockets came from. And it was kind of a
day-only. Now, we could go in there during the day,
And nobody ever saw or heard of them, they say. They
were little farming villages. But at night, you
know, they owned it. And we used to fly over there.
And, you know, the first time I flew over there at
night, I looked down and I had a navigator in the
back and I was sitting there flying. I said, well,
some people are shooting at us down there. Oh,
yeah, they shoot us all the time. We come in on a GCA
final. People down there shooting at you with
handguns and rifles and stuff. And after the push,
Now, the Tet Offensive, they got down pathway,
which was only about 80 miles from us, and they were
down into the big peninsula across there, and they
had 23-millimeter machine guns that were
shooting at us, coming around to turn on GCA final
landing to the south. So it got to be very
interesting. You know, you never flew with your
lights on, and if you did, you know, all of a sudden
there's craters all around you. It was really a
different situation. Okay.
All right. And there
was a lot of interesting things. They were talking
about this body count business. And that was
something that got really grossly overrated
then. You know, I'd go up on a day mission or
something like that, and we'd go up with a FAC,
which was usually flying either an OD-10 or an O2.
Occasionally, we'd use a FAST FAC, which was a guy
in either an F-100 or an F-4, that would go fly low to
the ground, find something, and zap up and shoot a
smoke rocket, a phosphorus rocket, down to mark
the target. And we'd come in from up on high. We were
safe from small arms fire, come down, drop bombs
and stuff on them. Then this guy in his fastback
would zip by and say, oh, it looks like about 30. He
could no more tell what the thing was. Even the guys
in the slow movies, there's just no way, no way they
could ever tell, you know, what the body count was.
They'd all come up with some magic number. I always
got the biggest kickback that way. The body count
on there was just so grossly unreliable it
wouldn't do it next time. It wasn't all that
important anymore. Well. Yeah, there were a lot of
fun things. We took some, went down to, there was a
ranger outfit that had three guys, and they were
the advisors to the militia. And it was in a little
village about 25, 30 miles from Jenaim. Right at
the beginnings of this Arizona territory, I was
telling you about. The V.C. owned it pretty much
during the night. But anyway, these Ranger guys
were trying to organize these villagers into
protecting themselves against the V.C. And I got
to be pretty good friends with Provost Marshall.
And in a combat situation in the Air Force, our
security police which are ordinarily the cops, so
to speak, become split into two sections. They
have the cops, and then they have kind of like an
infantry battalion, and they're equipped with
everything up to light tanks. They've got grenade
launchers and all that stuff. We had a fair amount
of ordnance, and he was always running out and
couldn't get it from the Army. We'd load up a
caravan. I'd take my jeep, he'd take his, and we'd
get one other jeep, and we'd go down and we would arm
ourselves with a couple of M-16s and handguns and
some M-60 grenade launchers and stuff, and we'd
haul a whole bunch of ordnance down to him, and he'd
give us the cook's tour of all the little villages.
If you can imagine 50 people living on a space of
land not much bigger than this lot. And in houses
made of cardboard and a few pieces of wood, tin, and
all this sort of thing. These were the refugee
villages. And little kids running around without
any clothes, very little to eat. They were really
heart-wrenching. And I could see why somebody
that had to live like that, you know, when the
Americans in the area, they thought their
government, that was all they could do for them. I
could see why they might think, well, hell, this is
all we're getting. We can do better with the other
side. There
was a lot to it. Vietnam is a beautiful country.
And a hundred years when all the scars have gone,
and that place really comes in, it would be a great
place to take a trip. Great place to take a trip.
It's a huge, big forest, hardwood forest, trees
300 feet tall, and beautiful white sandy beaches,
and all kinds of good fishing and things like that.
It's just all badly polluted by man. If we could
just kind of exterminate man from that whole setup
and then kind of come in and repopulate it,
I think we'd be all right.
Very interesting. I can sit and listen to stories
all night.